the rational Optimist by Matt Ridley
during his travels Sean Darwin came in
contact with the tribe of
hunter-gatherers quote some of the
fusions plainly showed that they had a
fair notion of barter I gave one man a
large nail without making any sign for a
return but he immediately picked out two
fish and handed them up to the point of
his spear no common language was needed
to understand the bargeant that they
were agreeing to
hi and welcome to the book club I'm
Bjorn and this place will bring you the
best book recommendations when it comes
to philosophy psychology human nature
and human potential every week so make
sure to subscribe today we're going to
talk about the rational Optimist by Matt
Ridley Matt Ridley is a British
journalist author and scientist before
the rational Optimist Ridley wrote
several other books including the Red
Queen sex and evolution of human nature
genome the autobiography of species in
33 chapters and the agile Gene in the
rational Optimist Ridley presents an
optimistic view of human progress and
prosperity throughout history the main
thesis of the book is that human
civilization has continuously improved
over time due to exchange of ideas the
specialization of Labor and the
accumulation of knowledge Ridley argues
that this progress is driven by what he
calls collective intelligence which
arises from human interaction trade and
collaboration Ridley challenges the
prevailing notion of pessimism by
presenting evidence that demonstrates
how life has consistently improved for
the majority of people throughout
history he argues that increased
specialization and trade have led to
Greater Innovation higher living
standards and improved well-being for
individuals across the globe the big
spark that started to separate Homo
sapiens from other animals was when we
discovered economics and trade at some
point in history humans started to
exchange services and good to each other
this was the birth of progress progress
in this case is defined as when
technology and habits change faster than
our autonomy this eventually led to the
division of labor and the more humans
started to specialize the more our
output increased let's turn to Adam
Smith for an example here when a
production process is divided into a
series of tasks and each laborer focuses
only on one of those tasks that it takes
to produce a good then we can produce
more to a higher quality and to a lower
cost doing only one of a series of tasks
that it takes to create a good let's say
a nail in the olden days for instance
might not be as fun and fulfilling as
doing the whole thing yourself but when
we separate the work at one person
hitting one person shaping the nail
someone else is doing the hardening
another one doing the packaging then we
get something magical because damn the
division of labor it has really
skyrocketed growth for Humanity and
provided prosperity for a lot of people
across the world a great metric for
Prosperity is time how much time do we
need to spend working and toiling in
order to be able to enjoy a pleasure or
a good quote an hour of work today earns
you 300 days of reading light an hour of
work in 1800 earned you 10 minutes of
reading light ideas such as the division
of labor plays a huge role when it comes
to economic growth but so does
technology new Energy Technologies for
instance allow textile workers to
produce as much output as it would take
20 minutes to produce in 1785 that same
amount took one minute in 1850.
technology allows us to quote
to make a smaller quantity of Labor
produce a greater quantity of work Adam
Smith Cole was another game changer that
allowed for a leap in specialization of
production and diversification of
consumption we have now noticed the
downside of it today we are discarding
the technology replacing it with better
energy sources but we're still keeping
the benefits that it gave us technology
has brought us a lot of good stuff but
this era of rapid and technological
innovation also has some aspects of it
that brings a lot of uncertainty and
unease into many aspects of human life a
few Generations ago it was almost
unimaginable that you would not continue
with your family trade of being a
carpenter a weaver a blacksmith whatever
and these days many people think that
well will what I'm do and what I'm
specialized in even be relevant in a few
years maybe even a few months and
combine this with our innate negativity
bias the tendency to put more emphasis
on negative events and facts than
positive ones and we have a recipe for
anxiety and uncertainty I've been
needing a book like this I'm an optimist
at heart but this last week's have
really taken a toll on me we have had
some gang shootings where I live we have
war in the news we have riots do we have
rice interest rates we have people
burning the Quran to just just to upset
the Islamic World here in Sweden if we
watch the news then things look kind of
Bleak in a native uncertainty having a
positive outlook of where humanity is
heading it works kind of like a
protective shield against anxiety and
worry regardless if it comes from
rational optimism or even irrational
sources such as maybe you believe in
manifestation and that you create your
own universe or you believe in a higher
power wherever your Source it it helps
attitude is everything and having a
positive outlook puts in a great
position in order to take the creative
action that is needed to you need to be
able to solve like the challenges that
we humans have ahead of us pessimists
says that the world is doomed if we
continue as we do but notice the
conditional there if
the thing is we won't continue as we do
because everything changes all the time
and we take on new strategies and we
avoid situations and we solve problems
along the way the world will not
continue as it is that's the whole point
of human progress before we get into the
verdict of this book I just want to say
if you like this content like And
subscribe so you don't miss out on any
more book reviews it really helps me and
also if you want to support book club
join my patreon for exclusive content I
picked up this book to regain hope math
read list analysis of the world is not
perfect I think he underestimated the
impact of global warming for instance
but that said his argument for the value
of exchange of ideas goods and services
and how it has put humans in a unique
position where we're able to handle
various difficulties and still improve
living standards throughout the world is
very convincing to say the least I
picked up the rational Optimist thanks
to this book The Almanac of Naval
ravikant and at the end of this book you
have a long list of reading
recommendations and it's slowly becoming
my go-to reading list for reading
inspiration similar to what Charlie
monger's reading list was for me a
couple of years ago I really recommend
you to watch my review of this book it's
an excellent book and it's my latest
entry to the great books list the
almanac of Naval River Compton you will
see more books that comes from this
guy's reading list one of them being the
beginning of infinity explanations that
transform the world another very
positive talk about human progress
if you're like me and you start to doubt
if humanity is heading in the right
direction then pick up the rational
optimistic we bring you some hope and
you will learn a thing or two about the
open market trade the exchange of ideas
and it has some quite remarkable points
you can check out factfulness another
book that gives us hope about the
progression of the human race I'm going
actually on vacation for a couple of
weeks two weeks I think so I might not
put up any videos but I'm back after
that with weekly book reviews just like
usual let me know in the comments what
you are reading right now because I love
to hear what you guys are into and I
love to pick up a book recommendation or
two from the comments
until next time we are now
[Music]